---
title: "AutoBool: Reinforcement-Learned LLM for Effective Automatic Systematic Reviews Boolean Query Generation"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2026-01-04-autobool
excerpt: 
date: 2025-05-14
page_type: "Long"
venue: 'Accepted SIGIR-2025'
paperurl: 'https://openreview.net/forum?id=D9NNghIgUR'
citation: 'Shuai Wang, Harrisen Scells, Bevan Koopman and Guido Zuccon. 2025. AutoBool: Reinforcement-Learned LLM for Effective Automatic Systematic Reviews Boolean Query Generation (Accepted EACL-2026).'
---
## Abstract
We present AutoBool, a reinforcement learning (RL) framework that trains large language models (LLMs) to generate effective Boolean queries for medical systematic reviews. Boolean queries are the primary mechanism for literature retrieval in this domain and must achieve high recall while maintaining reasonable precision---a challenging balance that existing prompt-based LLM approaches often struggle to achieve. A major limitation in this space is the lack of ground-truth best Boolean queries for each topic, which makes supervised fine-tuning impractical. AutoBool addresses this challenge by leveraging RL to directly optimize query generation against retrieval performance metrics, without requiring ideal target queries. To support this effort, we create and release the largest dataset of its kind: 65 588 topics in total for training and evaluating the task of automatic Boolean query formulation. Experiments on our new dataset and two established datasets (CLEF TAR and Seed Collection) show that AutoBool significantly outperforms zero-shot/few-shot prompting and matches or exceeds the effectiveness of much larger GPT-based models (e.g., GPT-4o, O3) using smaller backbones. It also approaches effectiveness of expert-authored queries while retrieving 10–16 times fewer documents. Ablation studies reveal the critical roles of model backbone, size, decoding temperature, and prompt design. Code and data are available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/AutoBool-B3E5/.